AN ACT abolishing the Office for Refugee Resettlement and prohibiting state participation in refugee resettlement programs.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened:

1 Statement of Purpose.

The general court finds that the refugee resettlement functions of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) were established administratively without statutory mandate, and that participation in refugee resettlement is a matter of federal jurisdiction. It is the intent of the general court to end New Hampshire’s administrative involvement in refugee resettlement and prevent the use of state or federal funds for such purposes.

⸻

2 New Subdivision; Office for Refugee Resettlement Prohibited.

Amend RSA 126-A by inserting after section 5 the following new subdivision:

Prohibition on Refugee Resettlement Activities

126-A:6 Office for Refugee Resettlement; Abolished.
I. The Office for Refugee Resettlement, currently administered by the department of health and human services within the office of health equity or any successor unit, is hereby abolished.
II. All programs, personnel, contracts, grants, and administrative rules associated with refugee resettlement shall be terminated within 60 days of the effective date of this act.

126-A:7 State Prohibition on Participation in Refugee Resettlement.
I. No agency, department, or political subdivision of the state of New Hampshire shall operate, administer, fund, or participate in any program whose purpose is the resettlement, placement, or integration of refugees, as defined in 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42).
II. No agency, department, or political subdivision shall contract with or allocate funds to any private or nonprofit entity for the purpose of facilitating refugee resettlement in New Hampshire.

126-A:8 Prohibition on Use of Federal Funds.
I. No state agency shall apply for, receive, accept, expend, or distribute any federal funds, including but not limited to funds authorized under the Refugee Act of 1980, 8 U.S.C. § 1521 et seq., for the purpose of administering, coordinating, or supporting refugee resettlement in the state.
II. Any unspent federal funds allocated for refugee resettlement shall be returned to the federal government or de-obligated in accordance with applicable federal guidelines.

126-A:9 Rulemaking and Implementation.
The commissioner of the department of health and human services shall, within 60 days of the effective date of this act, repeal or amend any rule, regulation, policy, or organizational structure relating to the Office for Refugee Resettlement or any refugee-related services.

126-A:10 Severability.
If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.

⸻

3 Effective Date.

This act shall take effect 60 days after its passage.
